 

                                                  




- i -   PREFACE  Introduction The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code (SFPC) is a state regulation promulgated by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development in cooperation with the Virginia Fire Services Board, both Governor-appointed boards, for the purpose of establishing statewide standards to safeguard life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the improper maintenance of life safety and fire prevention and protection materials, devices, systems and structures and the unsafe storage handling, and use of substances, materials and devices, including fireworks, explosives and blasting agents, wherever located.  The provisions of the SFPC are based on a nationally recognized model code published by the International Code Council, Inc. and fire protection and prevention standards published by the National Fire Protection Association.  Such code and standards are made part of the SFPC through a regulatory process known as incorporation by reference.  The SFPC also contains administrative provisions governing the use of the model code and standards and establishing requirements for the enforcement of the code by the local and state enforcing agencies.  In keeping with the designations of the SFPC used previously, since the 2009 edition of the International Fire Code is incorporated by reference into this version of the SFPC, it is known as the 2009 edition of the SFPC.  Arrangement The SFPC is part of the Virginia Administrative Code (VAC), the official compilation of state regulations published under the authority and guidance of the Virginia Code Commission.  Due to the difference in the section numbering system between the VAC and the model code incorporated by reference into the SFPC, the SFPC utilizes a dual section numbering system.  In the SFPC, the VAC section numbers are listed first, followed by a section number matching the model code system.  In this printing of the SFPC, the VAC section numbers are omitted and only the model code numbering system is utilized.  The version of the SFPC containing both the VAC section numbers and the model code numbering is available from the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) and may also be accessed through the website of the Virginia Code Commission or by subscription to the VAC.  Codes Purchased from ICC The 2009 edition of the SFPC is being made available in pamphlet form as in past editions of the SFPC.  In addition to the pamphlet form of the SFPC published by DHCD, the International Code Council (ICC) publishes a version of the SFPC.  In the ICC published version, marginal markings are provided to distinguish between text which is part of the International Codes and text which is part of the state regulation.  Double vertical lines in the margins within the body of the code indicate state amendments to the International Code.  As in the standard printings of the International Codes, a single vertical line in the margins within the body of the code indicates a technical change from the previous edition of the International Codes.  Deletions from the previous editions of the International Codes are indicated in the form of an arrow (  ) in the margin where an entire section, paragraph, exception or table has been deleted or an item in a list of items or a table has been deleted.  Technical Assistance DHCD, the State Fire Marshal’s Central and Regional Offices and local enforcing agencies may be contacted for further information concerning the SFPC.  Contact information for DHCD and the State Fire Marshal’s Office is below.  Additional contact information, including the regional State Fire Marshal’s Offices, is available at the websites.  DHCD, Division of Building and Fire Regulation Technical Assistance Services Office 600 East Main Street, Suite 300 Richmond, Virginia 23219 Phone: (804) 371-7150 Email: taso@dhcd.virginia.gov Website: www.dhcd.virginia.gov Virginia Department of Fire Programs State Fire Marshal’s Office 1005 Technology Park Drive Glen Allen, Virginia 23059 Phone: (804) 371-0220 Email: statefiremarshal@vdfp.virginia.gov Website: www.vafire.com    




 

ii  TABLE OF CONTENTS   CHAPTER 1    ADMINISTRATION  Section    101 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1   102 Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1   103 Incorporation by Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2   104 Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3   105 Enforcing Agency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3   106 Duties and Powers of the Fire Official . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4   107 Permits and Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5   108 Operational Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13   109 Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15   110 Unsafe Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15   111 Violations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16   112 Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17    INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE CHAPTERS  Chapter     2  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18    3  General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20    4  Emergency Planning and Preparedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21    5  Fire Service Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22    6  Building Services and Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24    8  Interior Finish, Decorative Materials and Furnishings . . 25    9  Fire Protection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25  10  Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27  22  Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages . . 27  27  Hazard Materials–General Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28  33  Explosives and Fireworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29  38  Liquefied Petroleum Gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37  46  Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings . . .  39  47  Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 1 -  CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION  SECTION 101 SCOPE  101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code (SFPC), hereinafter referred to as “this code” or “SFPC.” The term “chapter” means a chapter in the SFPC. The SFPC was cooperatively developed by the Virginia Fire Services Board and the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development.  101.2 Scope. The SFPC prescribes regulations affecting or relating to maintenance of structures, processes and premises and safeguards to be complied with for the protection of life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion and for the handling, storage and use of fireworks, explosives or blasting agents, and provides for the administration and enforcement of such regulations. The SFPC also establishes regulations for obtaining permits for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use, or sales of explosives. Inspections under the SFPC are a governmental responsibility.  101.3 Purpose. The purposes of the SFPC are to provide for statewide standards to safeguard life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the improper maintenance of life safety and fire prevention and protection materials, devices, systems and structures, and the unsafe storage, handling, and use of substances, materials and devices, including explosives and blasting agents, wherever located.  101.4 Validity. To the extent that any provisions of the SFPC or the referenced codes or standards are not within the scope of this chapter, those provisions are considered to be invalid. When any provision of the SFPC is found to be in conflict with the USBC, OSHA, or statute, that provision of the SFPC shall become invalid.  101.5 Local regulations. Any local governing body may adopt fire prevention regulations that are more restrictive or more extensive in scope than the SFPC provided such regulations do not affect the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, repair, or use of a building or structure, as provided in the USBC, including the voluntary installation of smoke alarms and regulation and inspections thereof in commercial buildings where such smoke alarms are not required under the provisions of the SFPC.  101.6 Nonresidential farm structures. Farm structures not used for residential purposes are exempt from the SFPC except when the inspection and enforcement provisions of the code are exercised by a warrant issued under the authority of Sections 27-98.2 through 27-98.5 of the Code of Virginia.  SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY  102.1 General. The provisions of the SFPC shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises as set forth in Section 101. The SFPC shall supersede any fire prevention regulations previously adopted by a local government or other political subdivision.  102.1.1 Changes. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any structure that would place the structure in a different division of the same group of occupancies, unless such structure is made to comply with the requirements of this code and the USBC.  102.2 Application to pre-1973 buildings and structures. Buildings and structures constructed prior to the USBC (1973) shall comply with the maintenance requirements of the SFPC to the extent that equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards which were provided and approved when constructed shall be maintained. Such buildings and structures, if subject to the state fire and public building regulations (Virginia Public Building Safety Regulations, VR 394-01-05) in effect prior to March 31, 1986, shall also be maintained in accordance with those regulations.  102.3 Application to post-1973 buildings and structures. Buildings and structures constructed under any edition of the USBC shall comply with the maintenance requirements of the SFPC to the extent that equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards which were provided and approved when constructed shall be maintained. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 2 -   102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in the IFC shall be those listed in Chapter 47 and considered part of the requirements of the SFPC to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 

 102.5 State-owned buildings and structures. The SFPC shall be applicable to all state-owned buildings and structures in the manner and extent described in Section 27-99 of the Code of Virginia and the State Fire Marshal shall have the authority to enforce this code in state-owned buildings and structures as is prescribed in Sections 27-98 and 27-99 of the Code of Virginia.  102.6 Relationship to USBC. In accordance with Sections 27-34.4, 36-105.1 and 36-119.1 of the Code of Virginia, the USBC does not supersede the provisions of this code that prescribe standards to be complied with in existing buildings and structures, provided that this code shall not impose requirements that are more restrictive than those of the USBC under which the buildings or structures were constructed. Subsequent alteration, enlargement, rehabilitation, repair or conversion of the occupancy classification of such buildings and structures shall be subject to the construction and rehabilitation provisions of the USBC. Inspection of buildings other than state-owned buildings under construction and the review and approval of building plans for these structures for enforcement of the USBC shall be the sole responsibility of the appropriate local building inspectors.   Upon completion of such structures, responsibility for fire safety protection shall pass to the local fire marshal or official designated by the locality to enforce this code in those localities that enforce the SFPC or to the State Fire Marshal in those localities that do not enforce this code.  102.7 Inspections for USBC requirements. The fire official shall require that existing structures subject to the requirements of the applicable retrofitting provisions relating to the fire protection equipment and system requirements of the USBC, Part I, Construction, Sections 103.7 and 3413, comply with the provisions located therein. 

 SECTION 103 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE  103.1. General. The following document is adopted and incorporated by reference to be an enforceable part of the SFPC:  The International Fire Code -- 2009 Edition, hereinafter referred to as “IFC,” published by the International Code Council, Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070, 1-888 422-7233. 

 103.1.1 Deletion. Delete IFC Chapter 1.  103.1.2 Appendices. The appendices in the IFC are not considered part of the IFC for the purposes of Section 103.1.  Note: Section 101.5 references authority contained in the Code of Virginia for local fire prevention regulations that may be evaluated by localities to determine whether provisions in the IFC appendices may be considered for local fire prevention regulations.  103.2 Amendments. All requirements of the referenced codes and standards that relate to fees, permits, unsafe notices, disputes, condemnation, inspections, scope of enforcement and all other procedural, and administrative matters are deleted and replaced by the provisions of Chapter 1 of the SFPC.  103.2.1 Other amendments. The SFPC contains provisions adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development (BHCD), some of which delete, change or amend provisions of the IFC and referenced standards. Where conflicts occur between such changed provisions and the unchanged provisions of the IFC and referenced standards, the provisions changed by the BHCD shall govern.  Note: The IFC and its referenced standards contain some areas of regulation outside of the scope of the SFPC, as established by the BHCD and under state law. Where conflicts have been readily noted, changes have been made to the IFC and its referenced standards to bring it within the scope of authority; however, in some areas, judgment will have to be made as to whether the provisions of the IFC and its referenced standards are fully applicable.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 3 -  103.3. International Fire Code. Retroactive fire protection system requirements contained in the IFC shall not be enforced unless specified by the USBC.  SECTION 104 ENFORCEMENT  104.1 Local enforcement. Any local government may enforce the SFPC following official action by such body. The official action shall (i) require compliance with the provisions of the SFPC in its entirety or with respect only to those provisions of the SFPC relating to open burning, fire lanes, fireworks, and hazardous materials and (ii) assign enforcement responsibility to the local agency or agencies of its choice. Any local governing body may establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this code. If a local governing body elects to enforce only those provisions of the SFPC relating to open burning, it may do so in all or in any designated geographic areas of its jurisdiction. The terms “enforcing agency” and “fire official” are intended to apply to the agency or agencies to which responsibility for enforcement of the SFPC has been assigned. The terms “building official” or “building department” are intended to apply only to the local building official or local building department.  104.1.1 Enforcement of fireworks provisions by law-enforcement officers. In accordance with Section 27-100.1 of the Code of Virginia, law-enforcement officers who are otherwise authorized to enforce certain provisions of this code shall not be subject to the certification requirements of Sections 105.2 or 105.3.2.  104.2. State enforcement. In accordance with Section 27-98 of the Code of Virginia, the State Fire Marshal shall also have the authority, in cooperation with any local governing body, to enforce the SFPC. The State Fire Marshal shall also have authority to enforce the SFPC in those jurisdictions in which the local governments do not enforce the SFPC and may establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of the SFPC in such jurisdictions.  104.3 State structures. Every agency, commission or institution of this Commonwealth, including all institutions of higher education, shall permit, at all reasonable hours, the fire official reasonable access to existing structures or a structure under construction or renovation, for the purpose of performing an informational and advisory fire safety inspection. The fire official is permitted to submit, subsequent to performing such inspection, his findings and recommendations, including a list of corrective actions necessary to ensure that such structure is reasonably safe from the hazards of fire, to the appropriate official of such agency, commission, or institution and the State Fire Marshal. Such agency, commission or institution shall notify, within 60 days of receipt of such findings and recommendations, the State Fire Marshal and the fire official of the corrective measures taken to eliminate the hazards reported by the fire official. The State Fire Marshal shall have the same power in the enforcement of this section as is provided for in Section 27-98 of the Code of Virginia. The State Fire Marshal may enter into an agreement as is provided for in Section 36-139.4 of the Code of Virginia with any local enforcement agency that enforces the SFPC to enforce this section and to take immediate enforcement action upon verification of a complaint of an imminent hazard such as a chained or blocked exit door, improper storage of flammable liquids, use of decorative materials, and overcrowding.  SECTION 105 ENFORCING AGENCY  105.1 Fire official. Each enforcing agency shall have an executive official in charge, hereinafter referred to as the “fire official.”  Note: Fire officials are subject to sanctions in accordance with the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21).  105.1.1 Appointment. The fire official shall be appointed in a manner selected by the local government having jurisdiction. After permanent appointment, the fire official shall not be removed from office except for cause after having been afforded a full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.  105.1.2 Notification of appointment. The appointing authority of the local governing body shall notify the DHCD and the State Fire Marshal’s Office (SFMO) within 30 days of the appointment or release of the permanent or acting fire official.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 4 -  105.1.3 Qualifications. The fire official shall have at least five years of fire-related experience as a firefighter, fire officer, licensed professional engineer or architect, fire or building inspector, contractor or superintendent of fire protection-related or building construction or at least five years of fire-related experience after obtaining a degree in architecture or engineering, with at least three years in responsible charge of work. Any combination of education and experience that would confer equivalent knowledge and ability shall be deemed to satisfy this requirement. The fire official shall have general knowledge of sound engineering practice with respect to the design and construction of structures, the basic principles of fire prevention and protection, the accepted requirements for means of egress and the installation of elevators and other service equipment necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and the public. The local governing body may establish additional qualification requirements.  105.2 Certification. The permanent or acting fire official shall obtain certification from the BHCD in accordance with the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21) within one year after permanent or acting appointment.  Exception: A fire official appointed prior to April 1, 1994, continuously employed by the same local governing body as the fire official shall comply with required DHCD training under the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21).  105.2.1 Noncertified fire official. Except for a fire official exempt from certification under the exception to Section 105.2, any acting or permanent fire official who is not certified as a fire official in accordance with the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21) shall attend the core module of the Virginia Building Code Academy or an equivalent course in an individual or regional code academy accredited by DHCD within 180 days of appointment. This requirement is in addition to meeting the certification requirement in Section 105.2.  105.3 Technical assistant. The local governing body or its designee may utilize one or more technical assistants who, in the absence of the fire official, shall have the powers and perform the duties of the fire official.  Note: Technical assistants are subject to sanctions in accordance with the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21).  105.3.1 Notification. The fire official shall notify the DHCD within 60 days of the employment, contract or termination of all technical assistants for enforcement of the SFPC.  105.3.2 Qualifications. A technical assistant shall have at least three years of experience and general knowledge in at least one of the following areas: fire protection, firefighting, electrical, building, plumbing or mechanical trades. Any combination of education and experience that would confer equivalent knowledge and ability shall be deemed to satisfy this requirement. The locality may establish additional qualification requirements.  105.3.3 Certification. All technical assistants employed by or under contract to an enforcing agency for enforcing the SFPC shall be certified in the appropriate subject area in accordance with the Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21) within one and one-half years after permanent or acting appointment. When required by a locality to have two or more certifications, the remaining certifications shall be obtained within three years from the date of such requirement.  Exception: Any technical assistant continuously employed by or continuously under contract to the same enforcing agency for enforcing the SFPC since before April 1, 1994, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; however, such exempt technical assistant shall comply with required DHCD training under Virginia Certification Standards (13 VAC 5-21).  105.4 Continuing education. Fire officials and technical assistants enforcing the SFPC shall attend periodic training courses as designated by the DHCD.  105.5 Control of conflict of interest. The standards of conduct for officials and employees of the enforcing agency shall be in accordance with the provisions of the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Chapter 31 (Section 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2 of the Code of Virginia.  SECTION 106 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FIRE OFFICIAL  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 5 -  106.1 General. The fire official shall enforce the provisions of the SFPC as provided herein and as interpreted by the State Building Code Technical Review Board (TRB) in accordance with Section 36-118 of the Code of Virginia.  106.2 Delegation of duties and powers. The fire official may delegate duties and powers subject to any limitations imposed by the local governing body. The fire official shall be responsible that any powers and duties delegated are carried out in accordance with this code.  106.3 Inspections. The fire official is authorized to conduct such inspections as are deemed necessary to determine the extent of compliance with the provisions of this code and to approve reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections by approved agencies or individuals shall be prepared and submitted in writing for review and approval. Inspection reports shall be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The fire official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual, detailed or complex technical issues in accordance with local policies.  106.3.1 Observations. When, during an inspection, the fire official or an authorized representative observes an apparent or actual violation of another law, ordinance or code not within the official's authority to enforce, such official shall report the findings to the official having jurisdiction in order that such official may institute the necessary measures.  106.4 Alternatives. The SFPC provisions are not intended to prevent the use of any safeguards used to protect life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion that are not specifically prescribed by the SFPC, provided that such alternative safeguards comply with the intent of the SFPC. The alternative safeguard offered shall be, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.  106.5 Modifications. The fire official may grant modifications to any provision of the SFPC upon application by the owner or the owner's agent provided the spirit and intent of the SFPC are observed and public health, welfare, and safety are assured.  Note: The current editions of many nationally recognized model codes and standards are referenced by the SFPC. Future amendments to such codes and standards do not automatically become part of the SFPC; however, the fire official should consider such amendments in deciding whether a modification request should be granted.  106.5.1 Supporting data. The fire official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any alternative. If it is determined that the evidence presented is satisfactory proof of performance for the use intended, the fire official shall approve the use of such alternative subject to the requirements of this code. The fire official may require and consider a statement from a professional engineer, architect or other competent person as to the equivalency of the proposed modification.  106.5.2 Decision. The application for modification and the final decision of the fire official shall be in writing and shall be recorded in the permanent records of the local enforcing agency.  106.6 Notices and orders. The fire official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with the SFPC.  106.7 Department records. The fire official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records or disposed of in accordance with General Schedule Number Ten available from The Library of Virginia.  SECTION 107 PERMITS AND FEES 

 107.1 Prior notification. The fire official may require notification prior to (i) activities involving the handling, storage or use of substances, materials or devices regulated by the SFPC; (ii) conducting processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or (iii) establishing a place of assembly.  107.2 Permits required. Permits may be required by the fire official as permitted under the SFPC in accordance with Table 107.2, except that the fire official shall require permits for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use, and sale of explosives. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 6 -  In accordance with Section 3301.2.3.1, an application for a permit to manufacture, store, handle, use, or sell explosives shall only be made by a designated individual. 

 Exception: Such permits shall not be required for the storage of explosives or blasting agents by the Virginia Department of State Police provided notification to the fire official is made annually by the Chief Arson Investigator listing all storage locations.  TABLE 107.2 OPERATIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS (to be filled in by local jurisdiction) DESCRIPTION PERMIT REQUIRED (yes or no) PERMIT FEE INSPECTION FEE 

Aerosol products. An operational permit is required to manufacture, store or handle an aggregate quantity of Level 2 or Level 3 aerosol products in excess of 500 pounds (227 kg) net weight.    

Amusement buildings. An operational permit is required to operate a special amusement building.    

Aviation facilities. An operational permit is required to use a Group H or Group S occupancy for aircraft servicing or repair and aircraft fuel-servicing vehicles. Additional permits required by other sections of this code include, but are not limited to, hot work, hazardous materials and flammable or combustible finishes.    

Carnivals and fairs. An operational permit is required to conduct a carnival or fair.    

Battery systems. An operational permit is required to install stationary lead-acid battery systems having a liquid capacity of more than 50 gallons (189 L).    

Cellulose nitrate film. An operational permit is required to store, handle or use cellulose nitrate film in a Group A occupancy.    

Combustible dust-producing operations. An operational permit is required to operate a grain elevator, flour starch mill, feed mill, or a plant pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium, spices or sugar, or other operations producing combustible dusts as defined in Chapter 2.    

Combustible fibers. An operational permit is required for the storage and handling of combustible fibers in quantities greater than 100 cubic feet (2.8 m3).  Exception: An operational permit is not required for agricultural storage.    

Compressed gas. An operational permit is required for the storage, use or handling at normal temperature and pressure (NTP) of compressed gases in excess of the amounts listed below. Exception: Vehicles equipped for and using compressed gas as a fuel for propelling the vehicle.   PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR COMPRESSED GASES TYPE OF GAS         AMOUNT              (cubic feet at NTP) Corrosive             200 Flammable (except cryogenic fluids and liquefied petroleum gases)          200 Highly toxic             Any amount Inert and simple asphyxiant         6,000 Oxidizing (including oxygen)         504 Toxic               Any amount For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3    

Covered mall buildings. An operational permit is required for: 1. The placement of retail fixtures and displays, concession equipment, displays of highly combustible goods and similar items in the mall. 2. The display of liquid- or gas-fired equipment in the mall. 3. The use of open-flame or flame-producing equipment in the mall.    

Cryogenic fluids. An operational permit is required to produce, store, transport on site, use, handle or dispense cryogenic fluids in excess of the amounts listed below. Exception: Operational permits are not required for vehicles equipped for and using cryogenic fluids as a fuel for propelling the vehicle or for refrigerating the lading. PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR CRYOGENIC FLUIDS TYPE OF CRYOGENIC FLUID INSIDE BUILDING  OUTSIDE BUILDING            (gallons)    (gallons) Flammable       More than 1       60    




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 7 -  Inert       60       500 Oxidizing  (includes oxygen)  10        50 Physical or health hazard not indicated above   Any Amount       Any Amount For SI: 1gallon = 3.785 L. 

Cutting and welding. An operational permit is required to conduct cutting or welding operations within the jurisdiction.    

Dry cleaning plants. An operational permit is required to engage in the business of dry cleaning or to change to a more hazardous cleaning solvent used in existing dry cleaning equipment.    

Exhibits and trade shows. An operational permit is required to operate exhibits and trade shows.    

Explosives. An operational permit is required for the manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosive, explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects within the scope of Chapter 33.    

Fire hydrants and valves. An operational permit is required to use or operate fire hydrants or valves intended for fire suppression purposes which are installed on water systems and accessible to a fire apparatus access road that is open to or generally used by the public. Exception: An operational permit is not required for authorized employees of the water company that supplies the system or the fire department to use or operate fire hydrants or valves.    

Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational permit is required: 1. To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within facilities of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement shall not apply to the offsite transportation in pipelines regulated by the Department of Transportation (DOTn) (see Section 3501.1.2) nor does it apply to piping systems (see Section 3503.6). 2. To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons (19 L) in a building or in excess of 10 gallons (37.9 L) outside of a building, except that a permit is not required for the following: 2.1. The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the fire official, would cause an unsafe condition. 2.2. The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days. 3. To store, handle or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning equipment. 4. To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes. 5. To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used. 6. To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank. 7. To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material which poses a greater hazard than that for which the tank was designed and constructed. 8. To manufacture, process, blend or refine flammable or combustible liquids.    

Floor finishing. An operational permit is required for floor finishing or surfacing operations exceeding 350 square feet (33 m2) using Class I or Class II liquids.    

Fruit and crop ripening. An operational permit is required to operate a fruit-, or crop-ripening facility or conduct a fruit-ripening process using ethylene gas.    

Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. An operational permit is required to operate a business of fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging and to maintain a room, vault or chamber in which a toxic or flammable fumigant is used.    

Hazardous materials. An operational permit is required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed below.    PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TYPE OF MATERIAL        AMOUNT Combustible liquids     See flammable and combustible liquids Corrosive materials  Gases        See compressed gases  Liquids         55 gallons  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 8 -   Solids         1000 pounds  Explosive materials       See explosives Flammable materials  Gases        See compressed gases  Liquids      See flammable and combustible liquids  Solids         100 pounds Highly toxic materials  Gases        See compressed gases  Liquids         Any amount  Solids         Any amount Oxidizing materials  Gases        See compressed gases  Liquids   Class 4        Any amount   Class 3        1 gallon   Class 2        10 gallons   Class 1        55 gallons  Solids   Class 4        Any amount   Class 3        10 pounds   Class 2        100 pounds   Class 1        500 pounds Organic peroxides  Liquids   Class I        Any amount   Class II        Any amount   Class III        1 gallon   Class IV        2 gallons   Class V        No permit required  Solids   Class I        Any amount   Class II        Any amount   Class III        10 pounds   Class IV        20 pounds   Class V        No permit required Pyrophoric materials  Gases         See compressed gases  Liquids         Any amount  Solids         Any amount Toxic materials  Gases         See compressed gases  Liquids         10 gallons  Solids         100 pounds Unstable (reactive) materials  Liquids   Class 4        Any amount   Class 3        Any amount   Class 2        5 gallons   Class 1        10 gallons  Solids   Class 4        Any amount   Class 3        Any amount   Class 2        50 pounds   Class 1        100 pounds Water-reactive materials  Liquids   Class 3        Any amount   Class 2        5 gallons   Class 1        55 gallons  Solids   Class 3        Any amount   Class 2        50 pounds   Class 1        500 pounds For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg. 

HPM facilities. An operational permit is required to store, handle or use hazardous production materials.    

High piled storage. An operational permit is required to use a building or portion thereof as a high-piled storage area exceeding 500 square feet (46 m2).    




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 9 -  Hot work operations. An operational permit is required for hot work including, but not limited to: 1. Public exhibitions and demonstrations where hot work is conducted. 2. Use of portable hot work equipment inside a structure. Exception: Work that is conducted under a construction permit. 3. Fixed-site hot work equipment such as welding booths. 4. Hot work conducted within a hazardous fire area. 5. Application of roof coverings with the use of an open-flame device. 6. When approved, the fire official shall issue a permit to carry out a Hot Work Program. This program allows approved personnel to regulate their facility’s hot work operations. The approved personnel shall be trained in the fire safety aspects denoted in this chapter and shall be responsible for issuing permits requiring compliance with the requirements found in this chapter. These permits shall be issued only to their employees or hot work operations under their supervision.    

Industrial ovens. An operational permit is required for operation of industrial ovens regulated by Chapter 21.    

Lumber yards and woodworking plants. An operational permit is required for the storage or processing of lumber exceeding 100,000 board feet (8,333 ft3) (236 m3).    

Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings. An operational permit is required to display, operate or demonstrate liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings.    

LP-gas. An operational permit is required for: 1. Storage and use of LP-gas. Exception: An operational permit is not required for individual containers with a 500-gallon (1893 L) water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3. 2. Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas.    

Magnesium. An operational permit is required to melt, cast, heat treat or grind more than 10 pounds (4.54 kg) of magnesium.    

Miscellaneous combustible storage. An operational permit is required to store in any building or upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, rubber, cork or similar combustible material.    

Open burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to.  Exception: Recreational fires.    

Open flames and candles. An operational permit is required to remove paint with a torch; use a torch or open-flame device in a hazardous fire area; or to use open flames or candles in connection with assembly areas, dining areas of restaurants or drinking establishments.    

Organic coatings. An operational permit is required for any organic-coating manufacturing operation producing more than 1 gallon (4 L) of an organic coating in one day.    

Assembly/educational. An operational permit is required to operate a place of assembly/educational occupancy.    

Private fire hydrants. An operational permit is required for the removal from service, use or operation of private fire hydrants. Exception: An operational permit is not required for private industry with trained maintenance personnel, private fire brigade or fire departments to maintain, test and use private hydrants.    

Pyrotechnic special effects material. An operational permit is required for use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material.    

Pyroxylin plastics. An operational permit is required for storage or handling of more than 25 pounds (11 kg) of cellulose nitrate (pyroxylin) plastics and for the assembly or manufacture of articles involving pyroxylin plastics.    

Refrigeration equipment. An operational permit is required to operate a mechanical refrigeration unit or system regulated by Chapter 6.    

Repair garages and service stations. An operational permit is required for operation of repair garages and automotive, marine and fleet service stations.    

Rooftop heliports. An operational permit is required for the operation of a rooftop heliport.    

Spraying or dipping. An operational permit is required to conduct a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or the application of combustible powders regulated by Chapter 15.    

Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts. An operational permit is required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts that exceeds    




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 10 -  2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) of total volume of scrap tires and for indoor storage of tires and tire byproducts. 

Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent. Exceptions: 1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes. 2. Tents and air-supported structures that cover an area of 900 square feet (84 m2) or less, including all connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance and with an occupant load of 50 or less persons. 3. Fabric canopies and awnings open on all sides which comply with all of the following: 3.1. Individual canopies shall have a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2). 3.2. The aggregate area of multiple canopies placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) shall not exceed 700 square feet (65 m2) total. 3.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) to structures and other tents shall be provided.    

Tire-rebuilding plants. An operational permit is required for the operation and maintenance of a tire-rebuilding plant.    

Waste handling. An operational permit is required for the operation of wrecking yards, junk yards and waste material-handling facilities.    

Wood products. An operational permit is required to store chips, hogged material, lumber or plywood in excess of 200 cubic feet (6 m3).    

 107.3 Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by the fire official.  107.4 Issuance of permits. Before a permit is issued, the fire official shall make such inspections or tests as are necessary to assure that the use and activities for which application is made comply with the provisions of this code.  107.5 Conditions of permit. A permit shall constitute permission to store or handle materials or to conduct processes in accordance with the SFPC, and shall not be construed as authority to omit or amend any of the provisions of this code. Permits shall remain in effect until revoked or for such period as specified on the permit. Permits are not transferable.  107.5.1 Special conditions for the State Fire Marshal’s Office. Permits issued by the State Fire Marshal’s Office for the use of explosives in special operations or under emergency conditions shall be valid for one week from the date of issuance and shall not be renewable.  107.6 State Fire Marshal. Permits will not be required by the State Fire Marshal except for those permits listed in Sections 107.13 and 107.14 of this code. 

 Exception: Such permits shall not be required for the storage of explosives or blasting agents by the Virginia Department of State Police provided notification to the State Fire Marshal is made annually by the Chief Arson Investigator listing all storage locations within areas where enforcement is provided by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.  107.7 Annual. The enforcing agency may issue annual permits for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use, or sales of explosives to any state regulated public utility.  107.8 Approved plans. Plans approved by the fire official are approved with the intent that they comply in all respects to this code. Any omissions or errors on the plans do not relieve the applicant of complying with all applicable requirements of this code.  107.9 Posting. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire official.  107.10 Suspension of permit. A permit shall become invalid if the authorized activity is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized activity is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencement.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 11 -  107.11 Revocation of permit. The fire official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the SFPC if conditions of the permit have been violated, or if the approved application, data or plans contain misrepresentation as to material fact.  107.12 Local fees. In accordance with Section 27-97 of the Code of Virginia, fees may be levied by the local governing body in order to defray the cost of enforcement and appeals under the SFPC. 

 107.13 State Fire Marshal’s Office permit fees for explosives, blasting agents, theatrical flame effects, and fireworks. Applications for firework or pyrotechnic displays shall be submitted to and received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office not less than 15 days prior to the planned event. Fees for permits issued by the State Fire Marshal’s Office for the storage, use, sale or manufacture of explosives or blasting agents, and for the display of fireworks and flame effects on state-owned property shall be as follows: 

 1. $125 per year per magazine to store explosives and blasting agents.  2. $200 per year per city or county to use explosives and blasting agents.  3. $150 per year to sell explosives and blasting agents.  4. $200 per year to manufacture explosives, blasting agents and fireworks.  5. $350 the first day of fireworks, pyrotechnics or proximate audience displays conducted in any state-owned building and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than 15 days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $450 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than seven days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $550 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. 

 6. $250 the first day of fireworks, pyrotechnics or proximate audience displays conducted out-of-doors on any state-owned property and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than 15 days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $450 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than seven days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $550 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events.  7. $100 per event for the use of explosives in special operations or emergency conditions.  8. $300 the first day for flame effects conducted in accordance with Section 308.3.6 indoors of any state-owned building or outdoors on state-owned property and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events, or, if conducted as part of a firework (pyrotechnic) display, $100 the first day and $75 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application for flame effects is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than 15 days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $450 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events. If an application is received by the State Fire Marshal’s Office less than seven days prior to the planned event, the permit fee shall be $550 per day and $150 per day for each consecutive day for identical multi-day events.  107.14 State annual inspection permit fees. Annual fees for inspection permits issued by the State Fire Marshal’s Office for the inspection of buildings shall be as follows:  1. Nightclubs.  1.1. $350 for occupant load of 100 or less.  1.2. $450 for occupant load of 101 to 200.  1.3. $500 for occupant load of 201 to 300.  1.4. $500 plus $50 for each 100 occupants where occupant loads exceed 300. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 12 -   2. Private college dormitories with or without assembly areas. If containing assembly areas, such assembly areas are not included in the computation of square footage.  2.1. $150 for 3500 square feet or less.  2.2. $200 for greater than 3500 square feet up to 7000 square feet.  2.3. $250 for greater than 7000 square feet up to 10,000 square feet.  2.4. $250 plus $50 for each additional 3000 square feet where square footage exceeds 10,000.  3. Assembly areas that are part of private college dormitories.  3.1. $50 for 10,000 square feet or less provided the assembly area is within or attached to a dormitory building.  3.2. $100 for greater than 10,000 square feet up to 25,000 square feet provided the assembly area is within or attached to a dormitory building, such as gymnasiums, auditoriums or cafeterias.  3.3. $100 for up to 25,000 square feet provided the assembly area is in a separate or separate buildings such as gymnasiums, auditoriums or cafeterias.  3.4. $150 for greater than 25,000 square feet for assembly areas within or attached to a dormitory building or in a separate or separate buildings such as gymnasiums, auditoriums or cafeterias.  4. Hospitals.  4.1. $300 for 1 to 50 beds.  4.2. $400 for 51 to 100 beds.  4.3. $500 for 101 to 150 beds.  4.4. $600 for 151 to 200 beds.  4.5. $600 plus $100 for each additional 100 beds where the number of beds exceeds 200.  5. Child day centers, assisted living facilities and adult day care centers licensed by the Virginia Department of Social Services based on licensed capacity as follows: 

 5.1. $50 for 1 to 8.  5.2. $75 for 9 to 20.  5.3. $100 for 21 to 50.  5.4. $200 for 51 to 100.  5.5. $400 for 101 or more.  Exception: Annual inspection permits for any building or groups of buildings on the same site may not exceed $2500.  107.15 Fee schedule. The local governing body may establish a fee schedule. The schedule shall incorporate unit rates, which may be based on square footage, cubic footage, estimated cost of inspection or other appropriate criteria.  107.16 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the designated fees have been paid.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 13 -  Exception: The fire official may authorize delayed payment of fees.  SECTION 108 OPERATIONAL PERMITS  108.1 General. Operational permits shall be in accordance with Section 108. The fire official may require notification prior to (i) activities involving the handling, storage or use of substances, materials or devices regulated by the SFPC; (ii) conducting processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or (iii) establishing a place of assembly.  108.1.1 Permits required. Operational permits may be required by the fire official in accordance with Table 107.2. The fire official shall require operational permits for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use and sale of explosives. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire official.  Exceptions:  1. Operational permits will not be required by the State Fire Marshal except for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use and sale of explosives in localities not enforcing the SFPC.  2. Operational permits will not be required for the manufacturing, storage, handling or use of explosives or blasting agents by the Virginia Department of State Police provided notification to the fire official is made annually by the Chief Arson Investigator listing all storage locations.  108.1.2 Duration of operational permits. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section 108.1.1 for either: 

 1. A prescribed period.  2. Until renewed or revoked.  108.1.3 Operational permits for the same location. When more than one operational permit is required for the same location, the fire official is authorized to consolidate such permits into a single permit provided that each provision is listed in the permit.  108.2 Application. Application for an operational permit required by this code shall be made to the fire official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire official.  108.2.1 Refusal to issue permit. If the application for an operational permit describes a use that does not conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the fire official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the application to the applicant with the refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal.  108.2.2 Inspection authorized. Before a new operational permit is approved, the fire official is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces or areas to be used to determine compliance with this code or any operational constraints required.  108.2.3 Time limitation of application. An application for an operational permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the fire official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is reasonable cause.  108.2.4 Action on application. The fire official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for operational permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the fire official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons. If the fire official is satisfied that the proposed work or operation conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the fire official shall issue a permit as soon as practicable. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 14 -   108.3 Conditions of a permit. An operational permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes in accordance with the SFPC, and shall not be construed as authority to omit or amend any of the provisions of this code. The building official shall issue permits to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other construction, equipment installation or modification in accordance with the provisions of this code where a permit is required by Section 108.5. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to omit or amend any of the provisions of this code.  108.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued.  108.3.2 Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The fire official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of the time period of a permit for periods of not more than 90 days each. Such extensions shall be requested by the permit holder in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.  108.3.3 Annual. The enforcing agency may issue annual operational permits for the manufacturing, storage, handling, use, or sales of explosives to any state regulated public utility.  108.3.4 Suspension of permit. An operational permit shall become invalid if the authorized activity is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized activity is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencement.  108.3.5 Posting. Issued operational permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire official.  108.3.6 Compliance with code. The issuance or granting of an operational permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Operational permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on other data shall not prevent the fire official from requiring the correction of errors in the provided documents and other data. Any addition to or alteration of approved provided documents shall be approved in advance by the fire official, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or amended permit.  108.3.7 Information on the permit. The fire official shall issue all operational permits required by this code on an approved form furnished for that purpose. The operational permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information required by the fire official. Issued permits shall bear the signature of the fire official.  108.4 Revocation. The fire official is authorized to revoke an operational permit issued under the provisions of this code when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited to, any one of the following:  1. The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued.  2. The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit.  3. Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated.  4. Inclusion of any false statements or misrepresentations as to a material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit.  5. The permit is used by a different person or firm than the person or firm for which it was issued.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 15 -  6. The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code within the time provided therein.  7. The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation or this code.  SECTION 109 INSPECTION  109.1 Inspection. The fire official may inspect all structures and premises for the purposes of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations, endanger life, or any violations of the provisions or intent of the SFPC.  Exception: Single family dwellings and dwelling units in two family and multiple family dwellings and farm structures shall be exempt from routine inspections. This exemption shall not preclude the fire official from conducting routine inspections in Group R-3 or Group R-5 occupancies operating as a commercial bed and breakfast as outlined in Section 310.1 of the USBC or inspecting under Section 27-98.2 of the Code of Virginia for hazardous conditions relating to explosives, flammable and combustible conditions, and hazardous materials.  109.1.1 Right to entry. The fire official may enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the fire official may pursue recourse as provided by law.  Note: Specific authorization and procedures for inspections and issuing warrants are set out in Sections 27-98.1 through 27-98.5 of the Code of Virginia and shall be taken into consideration.  109.1.2 Credentials. The fire official and technical assistants shall carry proper credentials of office when inspecting in the performance of their duties under the SFPC.  109.2 Coordinated inspections. The fire official shall coordinate inspections and administrative orders with any other state and local agencies having related inspection authority, and shall coordinate those inspections required by the USBC for new construction when involving provisions of the amended IFC, so that the owners and occupants will not be subjected to numerous inspections or conflicting orders.  Note: The USBC requires the building official to coordinate such inspections with the fire official.  109.3 Other inspections. In accordance with Section 36-139.3 of the Code of Virginia, the State Fire Marshal, upon presenting proper credentials, shall make annual inspections for hazards incident to fire in all (i) residential care facilities operated by any state agency, (ii) assisted living facilities licensed or subject to licensure pursuant to Chapter 18 (Section 63.2-1800 et seq.) of Title 63.2 of the Code of Virginia which are not inspected by a local fire marshal, (iii) student- residence facilities owned or operated by the public institutions of higher education in the Commonwealth, and (iv) public schools in the Commonwealth which are not inspected by a local fire marshal. In the event that any such facility or residence is found to be nonconforming to the SFPC, the State Fire Marshal or local fire marshal may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of an injunction.  SECTION 110 UNSAFE CONDITIONS  110.1 General. The fire official shall order the following dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in accordance with the SFPC:  1. Dangerous conditions which are liable to cause or contribute to the spread of fire in or on said premises, building or structure, or to endanger the occupants thereof.  2. Conditions which would interfere with the efficiency and use of any fire protection equipment.  3. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, which are liable to interfere with the egress of occupants or the operation of the fire department in case of fire. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 16 -   4. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.  5. Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil, grease or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment.  6. Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings, or other combustible materials, or excessive storage of any combustible material.  7. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances.  8. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or installed equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous materials.  9. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous materials.  10. All equipment, materials, processes or operations which are in violation of the provisions and intent of this code.  110.2 Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the safe and proper maintenance of any structure, premises or lot. In all structures, the fire protection equipment, means of egress, alarms, devices and safeguards shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition as required by the SFPC and applicable referenced standards.  110.3 Occupant responsibility. If a building occupant creates conditions in violation of this code, by virtue of storage, handling and use of substances, materials, devices and appliances, such occupant shall be held responsible for the abatement of said hazardous conditions.  110.4 Unsafe structures. All structures that are or shall hereafter become unsafe or deficient in adequate exit facilities or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or by reason of illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance or which have sustained structural damage by reason of fire, explosion, or natural disaster shall be deemed unsafe structures. A vacant structure, or portion of a structure, unguarded or open at door or window shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the meaning of this code. Unsafe structures shall be reported to the building official or building maintenance official who shall take appropriate action under the provisions of the USBC to secure abatement. Subsequently, the fire official may request the legal counsel of the local governing body to institute the appropriate proceedings for an injunction against the continued use and occupancy of the structure until such time as conditions have been remedied.  110.5 Evacuation. When, in the fire official's opinion, there is actual and potential danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any structure or premises because of unsafe structural conditions, or inadequacy of any means of egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, the fire official may order the immediate evacuation of the structure or premises. All notified occupants shall immediately leave the structure or premises and no person shall enter until authorized by the fire official.  110.6 Unlawful continuance. Any person who refuses to leave, interferes with the evacuation of other occupants or continues any operation after having been given an evacuation order shall be in violation of this code.  Exception: Any person performing work directed by the fire official to be performed to remove an alleged violation or unsafe condition.  SECTION 111 VIOLATIONS  111.1 Notice. When the fire official discovers an alleged violation of a provision of the SFPC or other codes or ordinances under the fire official’s jurisdiction, the fire official shall prepare a written notice citing the section allegedly violated, describing the condition deemed unsafe and specifying time limitations for the required abatements to be made to render the structure or premises safe and secure. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 17 -   111.2 Service. The written notice of violation of this code shall be served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such persons by mail to the last known post office address, by delivering in person or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the premises, or, in the case such person is not found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or avenue of access. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice.  111.3 Failure to correct violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the fire official shall request the legal counsel of the local governing body to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such alleged violation.  111.4 Penalty. Penalties upon conviction of violating the SFPC shall be as set out in Section 27-100 of the Code of Virginia.  111.5 Summons. When authorized and certified in accordance with Section 27-34.2 of the Code of Virginia, the fire official may, subject to any limitations imposed by the local governing body, issue a summons in lieu of a notice of violation. Fire officials not certified in accordance with Section 27-34.2 of the Code of Virginia may request the law-enforcement agency of the local governing body to make arrests for any alleged violations of the SFPC or orders affecting the immediate public safety.  SECTION 112 APPEALS  112.1 Local Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals (BFPCA). Each local governing body which enforces the SFPC shall have a BFPCA to hear appeals as authorized herein or it shall enter into an agreement with the governing body of another county or municipality, with some other agency, or with a state agency approved by the DHCD to act on appeals. An appeal case decided by some other approved agency shall constitute an appeal in accordance with this section and shall be final unless appealed to the State Building Code Technical Review Board (TRB).  112.2 Membership. The BFPCA shall consist of at least five members appointed by the local governing body and having terms of office established by written policy. Alternate members may be appointed to serve in the absence of any regular members and as such, shall have the full power and authority of the regular members. Regular and alternate members may be reappointed. Written records of current membership, including a record of the current chairman and secretary shall be maintained in the office of the local governing body. In order to provide continuity, the terms of the members may be of different length so that less than half will expire in any one-year period. The BFPCA shall meet at least once annually to assure a duly constituted board, appoint officers as necessary and receive such training on the code as may be appropriate or necessary from staff of the locality. 

 112.2.1 Chairman. The BFPCA shall annually select one of its regular members to serve as chairman. In case of the absence of the chairman at a hearing, the members present shall select an acting chairman.  112.2.2 Secretary. The local governing body shall appoint a secretary to the BFPCA to maintain a detailed record of all proceedings.  112.3 Qualifications of members. BFPCA members shall be selected by the local governing body on the basis of their ability to render fair and competent decisions regarding application of the SFPC and shall, to the extent possible, represent different occupational or professional fields relating to building construction or fire prevention. At least one member should be an experienced builder and one member a licensed professional engineer or architect. Employees or officials of the local governing body shall not serve as members of the BFPCA.  112.4 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has conflict of interest in accordance with the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Chapter 31 (Section 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2 of the Code of Virginia.  112.5 Application for appeal. The owner of a structure, the owner’s agent or any other person involved in the design, construction or maintenance of the structure may appeal a decision of the fire official concerning the application of the 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 18 -  SFPC or the fire official’s refusal to grant modification under Section 106.5 to the provisions of the SFPC. The appeal shall first lie to the local board of fire prevention code appeals (BFPCA) and then to the TRB except that appeals concerning the application of the SFPC or refusal to grant modifications by the State Fire Marshal shall be made directly to the TRB. The appeal shall be submitted to the BFPCA within 14 calendar days of the application of the SFPC. The application shall contain the name and address of the owner of the structure and the person appealing if not the owner. A copy of the written decision of the fire official shall be submitted along with the application for appeal and maintained as part of the record. The application shall be stamped or otherwise marked by the BFPCA to indicate the date received. Failure to submit an application for appeal within the time limit established by this section shall constitute acceptance of the fire official’s decision.  Note: In accordance with Section 27-98 of the Code of Virginia, any local fire code may provide for an appeal to a local board of appeals. If no local board of appeals exists, the TRB shall hear appeals of any local fire code violation. 

 112.6 Notice of meeting. The BFPCA shall meet within 30 calendar days after the date of receipt of the application for appeal. Notice indicating the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the parties in writing to the addresses listed on the application at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Less notice may be given if agreed upon by the applicant.  112.7 Hearing procedures. All hearings before the BFPCA shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the local governing body’s representative and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The chairman shall have the power and duty to direct the hearing, rule upon the acceptance of evidence and oversee the record of all proceedings.  112.7.1 Postponement. When a quorum of the BFPCA is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. The BFPCA shall reschedule the appeal within 30 calendar days of the postponement.  112.8 Decision. The BFPCA shall have the power to uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the fire official by a concurring vote of a majority of those present. Decisions of the BFPCA shall be final if no appeal is made therefrom and the appellant and the fire official shall act accordingly.  112.8.1 Resolution. The BFPCA’s decision shall be by resolution signed by the chairman and retained as part of the record by the BFPCA. The following wording shall be part of the resolution: “Any person who was a party to the appeal may appeal to the State Building Code Technical Review Board (TRB) by submitting an application to the TRB within 21 calendar days upon receipt by certified mail of this resolution. Application forms are available from the Office of the TRB, 600 East Main Street, Suite 300, Richmond, Virginia 23219, (804) 371-7150.” Copies of the resolution shall be furnished to all parties.  112.9 Appeal to the TRB. After final determination by the BFPCA, any person who was a party to the local appeal may appeal to the TRB. Application shall be made to the TRB within 21 calendar days of receipt of the decision to be appealed. Application for appeal to the TRB arising from the SFMO’s enforcement of the code shall be made to the TRB within 14 calendar days of receipt of the decision to be appealed and shall be accompanied by copies of the inspection reports and other relevant information. Failure to submit an application for appeal within the time limit established by this section shall constitute an acceptance of the BFPCA’s resolution or fire official’s decision.  112.9.1 Information to be submitted. Copies of the fire official’s decision and the resolution of the BFPCA shall be submitted with the application for appeal. Upon request by the office of the TRB, the BFPCA shall submit a copy of all inspection reports and all pertinent information from the record of the BFPCA.  112.9.2 Decision of TRB. Procedures of the TRB are in accordance with Article 2 (Section 36-108 et seq.) of Chapter 6 of Title 36 of the Code of Virginia. Decisions of the TRB shall be final if no appeal is made therefrom and the appellant and the code official shall act accordingly.  CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 19 -  Add the following definitions:  BACKGROUND CLEARANCE CARD. See Section 3302.1.  BLASTER, RESTRICTED. See Section 3302.1.  BLASTER, UNRESTRICTED. See Section 3302.1.  DESIGNATED INDIVIDUAL. See Section 3302.1. 

 DHCD. The Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development.  LOCAL GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNING BODY OR LOCALITY. The governing body of any county, city, or town, other political subdivision and state agency in this Commonwealth charged with the enforcement of the SFPC under state law.  NIGHT CLUB. Any building or portion thereof in which the main use is a place of public assembly that provides exhibition, performance or other forms or entertainment; serves alcoholic beverages; and provides music and space for dancing.  PYROTECHNICIAN (FIREWORK OPERATOR). See Section 3302.1. 

 RESPONSIBLE MANAGEMENT. See Section 3302.1.  SOLE PROPRIETOR. See Section 3302.1.  STATE FIRE MARSHAL. The State Fire Marshal as provided for by Section 36-139.2 of the Code of Virginia.  STATE REGULATED CARE FACILITY (SRCF). A building with an occupancy in Group R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 occupied by persons in the care of others where program oversight is provided by the Virginia Department of Social Services, the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services, the Virginia Department of Education or the Virginia Department of Juvenile Justice. 

 TECHNICAL ASSISTANT. Any person employed by or under an extended contract to a local enforcing agency for enforcing the SFPC. For the purposes of this definition, an extended contract shall be a contract with an aggregate term of 18 months or longer.  TRB. The Virginia State Building Code Technical Review Board.  USBC. The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (13 VAC 5-63).  Add the following definition under the term “Occupancy Classification--Residential Group R”:  R-5 DETACHED ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND MULTIPLE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS (TOWNHOUSES) NOT MORE THAN THREE STORIES HIGH WITH SEPARATE MEANS OF EGRESS AND THEIR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. The terms “R-5” and “one and two-family dwelling” where used in this code shall be interchangeable.  Change the following definition to read:  FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative. For the purpose of this code, the terms “code official” and “fire official” shall have the same meaning as the term “fire code official” and, in addition, such official shall have the powers outlined in Section 27-98.1 of the Code of Virginia.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 20 -  CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Add Section 301.3 to read:  301.3 Occupancy. The occupancy of a structure shall be continued as originally permitted under and in full compliance with the codes in force at the time of construction or alteration. The occupancy of a structure shall not change to another occupancy that will subject the structure to any special provisions of this code or the USBC without the approval of the building official.  Change Section 304.3.2 to read:  304.3.2 Capacity exceeding 5.88 cubic feet. Containers with a capacity exceeding 5.88 cubic feet (44 gallons) (0.17 m³) shall be provided with lids. Containers and lids shall be constructed of noncombustible materials or approved combustible materials.  Change Section 314.1 to read:  314.1 General. Indoor displays constructed within any building or structure shall comply with Sections 314.2 through 314.5.  Add Section 314.5 to read:  314.5 Smokeless powder and small arms primers. Venders shall not store, display or sell smokeless powder or small arms primers during trade shows inside exhibition halls except as follows:  1. The amount of smokeless powder displayed by each vender is limited to the amount established in Section 3306.5.1.1.  2. The amount of smokeless powder each vender may store is limited to the storage arrangements and storage amounts established in Section 3306.5.2.1. Smokeless powder shall remain in the manufacturer's original sealed container and the container shall remain sealed while inside the building. The repackaging of smokeless powder shall not be performed inside the building. Damaged containers shall not be repackaged inside the building and shall be immediately removed from the building in such manner to avoid spilling any powder.  3. There shall be at least 50 feet separation between venders and 20 feet from any exit.  4. Small arms primers shall be displayed and stored in the manufacturer's original packaging and in accordance with the requirements of Section 3306.5.2.3.  Change Section 315.3 to read:  315.3 Outside storage. Outside storage of combustible materials shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a property line or other building on the site.  Exceptions:  1. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced to 3 feet (914 mm) for storage not exceeding 6 feet (1829 mm) in height.  2. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced when the fire official determines that no hazard to the adjoining property exists.  Change Section 315.3.1 to read:  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 21 -  315.3.1 Storage beneath overhead projections from buildings. To the extent required by the code the building was constructed under, when buildings are required to be protected by automatic sprinklers, the outdoor storage, display and handling of combustible materials under eaves, canopies or other projections or overhangs is prohibited except where automatic sprinklers are installed under such eaves, canopies or other projections or overhangs.  CHAPTER 4 EMERGENCY PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS Add Section 401.1.1 to read:  401.1.1 State Regulated Care Facilities. When a state license is required by the Virginia Department of Social Services; Virginia Department of Behavioral Heath and Developmental Services; Virginia Department of Education; or Virginia Department of Juvenile Justice to operate, SRCF shall comply with this section and the provisions of Section 404. 

 Add item 15 to Section 404.2 to read: 

 15. SRCF.  Add exception to Section 405.1 to read:  Exception: Emergency evacuation drills shall not be conducted in school buildings during periods of mandatory testing required by the Virginia Board of Education.  Add the following category to Table 405.2 to read:  GROUP OR OCCUPANCY  FREQUENCY  PARTICIPATION 

SRCF Monthly All occupants 

 Add Section 405.2.1 to read:  405.2.1 High-rise buildings. Fire exit drills shall be conducted annually by building staff personnel or the owner of the building in accordance with the fire safety plan and shall not affect other current occupants.  Add Section 408.1.1 to read:  408.1.1 Maintaining occupant load posting. Occupant load postings required by the building code are required to be maintained.  Change Section 408.2 to read:  408.2 Group A occupancies. Group A occupancies shall comply with applicable requirements of Sections 408.2.1 through 408.2.3 and 401 through 406.  Add Sections 408.2.3, 408.2.3.1 and 408.2.3.2 to read:  408.2.3 Night clubs. Night clubs shall comply with Sections 408.2.3.1 and 408.2.3.2.  408.2.3.1 Audible announcements. Audible announcements shall be made to the occupants no longer than 10 minutes prior to the start of the entertainment and at each intermission to notify the occupants of the location of the exits to be used in the event of a fire or other emergency.  408.2.3.2 Occupant load count. Upon request of the fire code official, the owner or operator, or both, will be required to keep a running count of the occupant load to provide to the fire code official during performance hours of operation, entertainment hours of operation, or both. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 22 -   CHAPTER 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURES Delete Section 501.4.  Add exceptions to Section 503.1 to read:  Exceptions:  1. Fire apparatus access roads shall be permitted to be provided and maintained in accordance with written policy that establish fire apparatus access road requirements and such requirements shall be identified to the owner or his agent prior to the building official’s approval of the building permit.  2. On construction and demolition sites fire apparatus access roads shall be permitted to be provided and maintained in accordance with Section 1410.1.  Add exception to Section 503.2.1 to read: 

 Exception: Fire apparatus access roads exclusively serving single family dwelling or townhouse developments which are fully sprinklered as provided for in Sections R313.1 or R313.2 of the International Residential Code shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 18 feet (5486 mm), exclusive of shoulders.  Add Section 503.7 to read:  503.7 Fire lanes for existing buildings. The fire code official is authorized to designate public and private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective operation of fire apparatus. Fire lanes shall comply with Sections 503.2 through 503.6.  Change the title of Section 506 to read “Key Boxes and Elevator Fire Service Keys.”  Change Section 506.1 to read:  506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type listed in accordance with UL 1037 and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official.  Exception: Existing key boxes are not required to be listed in accordance with UL 1037 unless replaced.  Add Section 506.3, including all subsections, to read:  506.3 Standardized fire service elevator keys. All buildings with elevators equipped with Phase I emergency recall or Phase II emergency in-car operation, or buildings equipped with fire service access or occupant evacuation elevators shall be equipped to operate with a standardized fire service key approved by the fire code official.  Exception: Where providing a standardized key is not possible due to the existing non-standard elevator equipment, the owner shall be permitted to place the building’s non-standardized fire service elevator keys in a key box installed in accordance with Section 506.1. 

 506.3.1 Requirements for standardized fire service keys. Standardized fire service elevator keys shall comply with all of the following:  1. All fire service elevator keys within the jurisdiction shall be uniform and specific for the jurisdiction. Keys shall be cut to a uniform key code.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 23 -  2. Fire service elevator keys shall be a patent protected design to prevent unauthorized duplication.  3. Fire service elevator keys subject to these rules shall be engraved with the words “DO NOT DUPLICATE.”  506.3.2 Access to standardized fire service keys. Access to standardized fire service elevator keys shall be restricted to the following persons or groups:  1. Elevator owners or their authorized agents.  2. Elevator contractors.  3. Elevator inspectors of the jurisdiction.  4. Fire and building code officials of the jurisdiction.  5. The fire department and other emergency response agencies designated by the fire code official and the code official responsible for the enforcement of Part III, Maintenance, of the USBC.  506.3.3 Duplication or distribution of keys. No person may duplicate a standardized fire service elevator key or issue, give, or sell a duplicated key unless in accordance with this code.  506.3.4 Responsibility to provide keys. The building owner shall provide up to three standardized fire service elevator keys, if required by the fire code official, upon installation of a standardized fire service key switch or switches in the building.  Add Sections 507.3.1 and 507.3.2 to read:  507.3.1 Fire flow requirements for fully sprinklered residential developments. Notwithstanding Section 103.1.2, the fire flow requirements in Table B105.1 of Appendix B of the IFC, as modified by Section 507.3.2, shall be permitted to be used for determining fire flow in single family dwelling and townhouse developments which are fully sprinklered as provided for in Sections R313.1 or R313.2 of the International Residential Code.  507.3.2 Modifications to Table B105.1. The first six rows of columns five and six of Table B105.1 of Appendix B of the IFC shall be modified as shown below for the use of Table B105.1 in Section 507.3.1.  TYPE 5-B FIRE-FLOW (GALLONS PER MINUTE) 

0-5000 1000 

5001-7200 1250 

7201-8200 1500 

8201-9500 1750 

9501-11300 2000 

11301-13000 2250 

 Change Section 507.5.1 to read:  507.5.1 Where required. Fire hydrant systems shall be located and installed as directed by the fire department. Fire hydrant systems shall conform to the written standards of the jurisdiction and the fire department.  

 Add Section 507.5.1.1 to read: 

 507.5.1.1 Fire hydrant requirements for fully sprinklered residential developments. Notwithstanding Section 103.1.2, the number and distribution of fire hydrants in Table C105.1 of Appendix C of the IFC shall be permitted to be used in single family dwelling and townhouse developments which are fully sprinklered as provided for in Sections R313.1 or R313.2 of the International Residential Code, with the spacing and distances of fire hydrants indicated in Table C105.1 increased by 100%.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 24 -  Change Section 510 to read:  SECTION 510 MAINTENANCE OF IN-BUILDING EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT  510.1 General. In-building emergency communication equipment shall be maintained in accordance with USBC and the provisions of this section. 

 510.2 Additional in-building emergency communications installations. If it is determined by the locality that increased amplification of their emergency communication system is needed, the building owner shall allow the locality access as well as provide appropriate space within the building to install and maintain necessary additional communication equipment by the locality. If the building owner denies the locality access or appropriate space, or both, the building owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of these additional systems. 

 510.3 Field tests. After providing reasonable notice to the owner or their representative, the fire official, police chief, or their agents shall have the right during normal business hours, or other mutually agreed upon time, to enter onto the property to conduct field tests to verify that the required level of radio coverage is present at no cost to the owner. 

 CHAPTER 6 BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS Add a note to Section 603.7 to read:  Note: The fire code official may request a copy of the latest certificate of inspection from the Virginia Department of Labor and Industry for boilers and pressure vessels subject to such requirements. When the certificate is not available, the fire code official shall notify the Department of Labor and Industry to ensure that the required maintenance and testing is performed in accordance the Virginia Boiler and Pressure Vessel Regulations (16 VAC 25-50).  Add Section 604.6 to read:  604.6 Testing of Battery Powered Emergency Lights and Exit Signs. Required emergency lighting utilizing battery powered emergency lights or exit signs, or both, shall be tested annually. The emergency lights and exit signs shall be tested for proper operation for the time period established in the building code in effect when the equipment was installed. Written records of tests shall be retained by the owner of the building for a minimum of two years after the test is conducted and shall be made available to the fire code official upon request.  Change Section 605.10.1 to read: 

 605.10.1 Listed and labeled. Only portable electric space heaters listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1278 shall be used.  CHAPTER 8 INTERIOR FINISH, DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND FURNISHINGS Add exception 3 to Section 806.1.1 to read:  3. Trees shall be permitted in places of worship in Group A occupancies.  Change Section 807.1 to read:  807.1 General requirements. In occupancies in Groups A, E, I and R-1 and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, hangings and other decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 806.2 or be noncombustible.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 25 -  Exception: In dwelling units or sleeping rooms in Group R-2 dormitories, the permissible amount of decorative material suspended from or attached to the walls shall not exceed 50% of the aggregate area of the walls where the building has an approved automatic sprinkler system or 20% of the aggregate area of the walls where approved smoke alarms are provided and in the corridors of such buildings, the permissible amount of decorative material suspended from or attached to the walls shall not exceed 10% of the aggregate area of the walls.   In Groups I-1 and I-2, combustible decorative materials shall meet the flame propagation criteria of NFPA 701 unless the decorative materials, including, but not limited to, photographs and paintings, are of such limited quantities that a hazard of fire development or spread is not present. In Group I-3, combustible decorative materials are prohibited.   Fixed or movable walls and partitions, paneling, wall pads and crash pads, applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation or other purposes, shall be considered interior finish if they cover 10% or more of the wall or of the ceiling area, and shall not be considered decorative materials or furnishings.   In Group B and M occupancies, fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling and not supported by the floor shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria in accordance with Section 807.2 and NFPA 701 or shall be noncombustible.  CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS Change Section 901.4.2 to read:  901.4.2 Nonrequired fire protection systems. Nonrequired fire protection systems shall be maintained to function as originally installed. If any such systems are to be reduced in function or discontinued, approval shall be obtained from the building official in accordance with Section 103.8.1 of Part I of the USBC.  Delete Section 901.4.3.  Change Section 901.6 to read:  901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance. To the extent that equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards, such as fire detection, alarm and extinguishing systems, which were provided and approved by the building official when constructed, shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times. And where such equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards are found not to be in an operative condition, the fire official shall order all such equipment to be rendered safe in accordance with the USBC.  Add Section 901.10 to read:  901.10 Defective equipment. When the fire official determines through investigation or testing or reports by a nationally recognized testing agency that specific, required water sprinkler or water-spray extinguishing equipment has been identified as failing to perform or operate through not less than 30 randomly selected sprinkler heads at four or more building sites anywhere in the nation, the fire official shall order all such equipment to be rendered safe.  Change the following definition in Section 902 to read:  AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. An approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the area of a fire. Such system shall include an automatic sprinkler system, unless otherwise expressly stated.  Change item 1 in Section 906.1 to read:  1. In Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-4 and S occupancies.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 26 -  Exception: In Group I-3 occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be permitted to be located at staff locations and the access to such extinguishers shall be permitted to be locked. 

 Add a note to Section 906.1 to read:  Note: In existing buildings, whether fire extinguishers are needed is determined by the USBC or other code in effect when such buildings were constructed.  Change Section 907.9.2 to read: 

 907.9.2 Testing. Testing shall be performed in accordance with the schedules in Chapter 10 of NFPA 72 or more frequently where required by the fire code official. Where automatic testing is performed at least weekly by a remotely monitored fire alarm control unit specifically listed for the application, the manual testing frequency shall be permitted to be extended to annual. In Group R-1 occupancies, battery-powered single station smoke detectors shall be tested and inspected at one-month intervals.  Exception: Devices or equipment that are inaccessible for safety considerations shall be tested during scheduled shutdowns where approved by the fire code official, but not less than every 18 months.  Change Section 907.9.5 to read: 

 907.9.5 Maintenance, inspection and testing. The building owner shall be responsible to maintain the fire and life safety systems in an operable condition at all times. Service personnel shall meet the qualification requirements of NFPA 72 for maintaining, inspecting and testing such systems. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the fire code official. In addition to all applicable information contained in Figure 10.6.2.3 of NFPA 72, the written record of inspections, testing and maintenance shall contain the following minimum information.  1. Date, name and address of property.  2. Name of person performing inspection, maintenance and tests, or combination thereof, and affiliation, business address and telephone number.  3. Name, address and representative of approving agency or agencies.  4. Test frequency.  5. Designation of the detector or detectors tested (for example, “Test performed in accordance with Section _______.”).  6. Physical location (for example, “Heat detector in main kitchen; horn-strobe in Room 115.”) and a list of all initiating and notification devices and appliances tested.  7. Functional list of detectors and required sequence of operations.  8. Check of all smoke detectors.  9. Loop resistance for all fixed-temperature, line-type detectors.  10. Other tests as required by either the equipment manufacturer’s published instructions or the authority having jurisdiction.  11. Signature tests as required by the authority having jurisdiction.  12. Disposition of problems identified during test (examples, “Owner notified,” “Problem corrected or successfully retested, or both,” “Device abandoned in place.”).  Add Section 908.7 to read: 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 27 -   908.7 Carbon monoxide alarms. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be maintained as approved. 

 CHAPTER 10 MEANS OF EGRESS Add Section 1001.3 to read:   1001.3 Overcrowding. Overcrowding, admittance of any person beyond the approved occupant load established by the USBC or other building code under which the building was constructed, or obstructing aisles, passageways or any part of the means of egress shall not be allowed. The fire code official, upon finding any condition that constitutes a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to cause the event to be stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected.   CHAPTER 22 MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES Change Section 2205.4 to read: 

 2205.4 Sources of ignition. Smoking and open flames shall be prohibited within 20 feet (6096 mm) of a fuel dispensing device. The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during fueling. Electrical equipment shall be in accordance with NFPA 70.  Change Section 2206.2.1.1 to read:   2206.2.1.1 Inventory control and leak detection for underground tanks. Accurate inventory records shall be maintained on underground fuel storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks and piping. The records shall be kept at the premises or made available for inspection by the fire official within 24 hours of a written or verbal request and shall include records for each tank. Where there is more than one system consisting of tanks serving separate pumps or dispensers for a product, the inventory record shall be maintained separately for each tank system.   Owners and operators of underground fuel storage tanks shall provide release detection for tanks and piping that routinely contain flammable and combustible liquids in accordance with one of the following methods:  1. Monthly inventory control to detect a release of at least 1.0% of flow-through plus 130 gallons.   2. Manual tank gauging for tanks with 2,000 gallon capacity or less when measurements are taken at the beginning and ending of a 36- to 58-hour period during which no liquid is added to or removed from the tank.   3. Tank tightness testing capable of detecting a 0.1 gallon per hour leak rate.   4. Automatic tank gauging that tests for loss of liquid.   5. Vapor monitoring for vapors within the soil of the tank field.   6. Groundwater monitoring when the groundwater is never more than 20 feet from the ground surface.   7. Interstitial monitoring between the underground tank and a secondary barrier immediately around or beneath the tank.   8. Other approved methods that have been demonstrated to be as effective in detecting a leak as the methods listed above.    A consistent or accidental loss of product shall be immediately reported to the fire official. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 28 -   CHAPTER 27 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS – GENERAL PROVISIONS Add the following language to the end of Section 2701.5.1 to read: 

 The HMMP shall be maintained onsite for use by emergency responders, and shall be updated not less than annually.  Add the following language to the end of Section 2701.5.2 to read:  The HMIS shall be maintained onsite or readily available through another means where approved by the fire code official for use by temporary responders, and shall be updated not less than annually.  Add Sections 2701.5.3, 2701.5.3.1 and 2701.5.3.2 to read:  2701.5.3 Repository container. When a HMMP or HMIS is required, the owner or operator shall provide a repository container (lock box) or other approved means for the storage of items required in Sections 2701.5.1 and 2701.5.2 so as to be readily available to emergency response personnel.  2701.5.3.1 Location and identification. The repository container (lock box) shall be located, installed and identified in an approved manner.  2701.5.3.2 Keying. All repository containers (lock boxes) shall be keyed as required by the fire code official.  Change Section 2703.3.1.4 to read:  2703.3.1.4 Responsibility for cleanup. The person, firm or corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. The fire code official may require records and receipts to verify cleanup and proper disposal of unauthorized discharges. When deemed necessary by the fire code official, cleanup may be initiated by the fire department or by an authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge.  CHAPTER 33 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS Change exception 4 in Section 3301.1 to read:  4. The possession, storage, and use of not more than 15 pounds (6.81 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of smokeless powder and any amount of small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption.  Add exceptions 10, 11 and 12 to Section 3301.1 to read:  10. The storage, handling, or use of explosives or blasting agents pursuant to the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia.  11. The display of small arms primers in Group M when in the original manufacturer's packaging.  12. The possession, storage and use of not more than 50 pounds (23 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 100 pounds (45 kg) of smokeless powder, and small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption in Group R-3 or R-5, or 200 pounds (91 kg) of smokeless powder when stored in the manufacturer's original containers in detached Group U structures at least 10 feet (3048 mm) from inhabited buildings and are accessory to Group R-3 or R-5. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 29 -   Change exception 4 in Section 3301.1.3 to read:  4. The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of permissible fireworks where allowed by applicable local or state laws, ordinances and regulations provided such fireworks comply with CPSC 16 CFR, Parts 1500-1507, and DOTn 49 CFR, Parts 100-178, for consumer fireworks.  Add exception 5 to Section 3301.1.3 to read:  5. The sale or use of materials or equipment when such materials or equipment is used or to be used by any person for signaling or other emergency use in the operation of any boat, railroad train or other vehicle for the transportation of persons or property.  Change entire Section 3301.2 to read:  3301.2 Permit required. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 107.2 and regulated in accordance with this section. The manufacture, storage, possession, sale and use of fireworks or explosives shall not take place without first applying for and obtaining a permit.  3301.2.1 Residential uses. No person shall keep or store, nor shall any permit be issued to keep, possess or store, any fireworks or explosives at any place of habitation, or within 100 feet (30,480 mm) thereof.  Exception: Storage of smokeless propellant, black powder, and small arms primers for personal use and not for resale in accordance with Section 3306.  3301.2.2 Sale and retail display. Except for the Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, National Guard, federal, state and local regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities, explosives shall not be sold, given, delivered or transferred to any person or company not in possession of a valid permit. The holder of a permit to sell explosives shall make a record of all transactions involving explosives in conformance with Section 3303.2 and include the signature of any receiver of the explosives. No person shall construct a retail display nor offer for sale explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks upon highways, sidewalks, public property, or in assembly or educational occupancies.  3301.2.3 Permit restrictions. The fire official is authorized to limit the quantity of explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks permitted at a given location. No person, possessing a permit for storage of explosives at any place, shall keep or store an amount greater than authorized in such permit. Only the kind of explosive specified in such a permit shall be kept or stored.  3301.2.3.1 Permit applicants. As a condition of permit as provided for in Section 107.5, the fire official shall not issue a permit to manufacture, store, handle, use or sell explosives or blasting agents to any applicant who has not provided on the permit application the name and signature of a designated individual as representing the applicant. When, as provided for in Section 107.2 or 107.6, a permit is required to conduct a fireworks display, as a condition of permit as provided for in Section 107.5, the fire official shall not issue a permit to design, setup or conduct a fireworks display to any applicant who has not provided on the permit application the name and signature of a designated individual as representing the applicant. 

  If the applicant’s designated individual changes or becomes no longer qualified to represent the applicant as responsible management or designated individual, the applicant shall notify the fire official who issued the permit on the change of status of the designated individual. The notice is to be made prior to the use of any explosives or conducting a fireworks display but in no case shall the notification occur more than seven days after the change of status and shall provide the name of another designated individual. The fire official may revoke or require the reissuance of a permit based on a change of permit conditions or status or inability to provide another designated individual.  3301.2.3.1.1 BCC. The SFMO shall process all applications for a BCC for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia and will be the sole provider of a BCC. Using forms provided by the SFMO, a BCC may be applied for and issued to any person who submits to the completion of a background 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 30 -  investigation by providing fingerprints and personal descriptive information to the SFMO. The SFMO shall forward the fingerprints and personal descriptive information to the Central Criminal Records Exchange for submission to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining a national criminal history records check regarding such applicant. 

 3301.2.3.1.2 Issuance of a BCC. The issuance of a BCC shall be denied if the applicant or designated person representing an applicant has been convicted of any felony, whether such conviction occurred under the laws of the Commonwealth, or any other state, the District of Columbia, the United States or any territory thereof, unless his civil rights have been restored by the Governor or other appropriate authority.  3301.2.3.1.3 Fee for BCC. The fee for obtaining or renewing a background clearance card from SFMO shall be $150 plus any additional fees charged by other agencies for fingerprinting and for obtaining a national criminal history record check through the Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.  3301.2.3.1.4 Revocation of a BCC. After issuance of a BCC, subsequent conviction of a felony will be grounds for immediate revocation of a BCC, whether such conviction occurred under the laws of the Commonwealth, or any other state, the District of Columbia, the United States or any territory thereof. The BCC shall be returned to the SFMO immediately. An individual may reapply for his BCC if his civil rights have been restored by the Governor or other appropriate authority.  3301.2.4 Financial responsibility. Before a permit is issued, as required by Section 3301.2, the applicant shall file with the jurisdiction a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of $500,000 or a public liability insurance policy for the same amount, for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act authorized by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. The legal department of the jurisdiction may specify a greater amount when conditions at the location of use indicate a greater amount is required. Government entities shall be exempt from this bond requirement.  3301.2.4.1 Blasting. Before approval to do blasting is issued, the applicant for approval shall file a bond or submit a certificate of insurance in such form, amount, and coverage as determined by the legal department of the jurisdiction to be adequate in each case to indemnify the jurisdiction against any and all damages arising from permitted blasting but in no case shall the value of the coverage be less than $500,000.  Exception: Filing a bond or submitting a certificate of liability insurance is not required for blasting on real estate parcels of five or more acres conforming to the definition of “real estate devoted to agricultural use” or “real estate devoted to horticultural use” in Section 58.1-3230 of the Code of Virginia and conducted by the owner of such real estate.  3301.2.4.2 Fireworks display. The permit holder shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the legal department of the jurisdiction for the payment of all potential damages to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permit holder, the agent, employees or subcontractors, but in no case shall the value of the coverage be less than $500,000. 

 Change entire Section 3301.4 to read:  3301.4 Qualifications. Persons in charge of magazines, blasting, fireworks display, or pyrotechnic special effect operations shall not be under the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of age and possess knowledge of all safety precautions related to the storage, handling or use of explosives, explosive materials or fireworks.  3301.4.1 Certification of blasters and pyrotechnicians. Certificates as a restricted blaster, unrestricted blaster or pyrotechnician will be issued upon proof of successful completion of an examination approved by the SFMO commensurate to the certification sought and completion of a background investigation for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia. The applicant for certification shall submit proof to the SFMO of the following experience: 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 31 -   1. For certification as a restricted blaster, at least one year under direct supervision by a certified unrestricted blaster, certified restricted blaster or other person(s) approved by the SFMO.  2. For certification as an unrestricted blaster, at least one year under direct supervision by a certified unrestricted blaster or other person or persons approved by the SFMO.  3. For certification as a pyrotechnician, aerial, or pyrotechnician, proximate, applicant was in responsible charge of, or has assisted in the documented design, setup and conducting of, a fireworks display on at least six occasions within the 24 months immediately preceding the application for certification. 

  The SFMO shall process all certification applicants for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia and will be the sole provider of blaster and pyrotechnician certifications. 

 

Exception: The use of explosives by the owner of real estate parcels of five or more acres conforming to the definition of “real estate devoted to agricultural use” or “real estate devoted to horticultural use” in Section 58.1-3230 of the Code of Virginia when blasting on such real estate.  

3301.4.2 Certification issuance. The issuance of a certification as a blaster or pyrotechnician shall be denied if the applicant has (i) been convicted of any felony, whether such conviction occurred under the laws of the Commonwealth, or any other state, the District of Columbia, the United States or any territory thereof, unless his civil rights have been restored by the Governor or other appropriate authority, (ii) has not provided acceptable proof or evidence of the experience required in Section 3301.4.1, or (iii) has not provided acceptable proof or evidence of the continued training or education required in Section 3301.4.5. 

 3301.4.3 Fee for certification. The fee for obtaining or renewing a blaster or pyrotechnician certificate from SFMO shall be $150 plus any additional fees charged by other agencies for fingerprinting and for obtaining a national criminal history record check through the Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

 3301.4.4 Revocation of a blaster or pyrotechnician certification. After issuance of a blaster or pyrotechnician certification, subsequent conviction of a felony will be grounds for immediate revocation of a blaster or pyrotechnician certification, whether such conviction occurred under the laws of the Commonwealth, or any other state, the District of Columbia, the United States or any territory thereof. The certification shall be returned to the SFMO immediately. An individual may subsequently reapply for his blaster or pyrotechnician certification if his civil rights have been restored by the Governor or other appropriate authority. 

 3301.4.5 Expiration and renewal of a BCC, or blaster or pyrotechnician certification. A certificate for an unrestricted blaster, restricted blaster or pyrotechnician shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance. A BCC shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance. Renewal of the unrestricted blaster certificate will be issued upon proof of at least 16 accumulated hours of continued training or education in the use of explosives within three consecutive years and a background investigation for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia. Renewal of the restricted blaster certificate will be issued upon proof of at least eight accumulated hours of continued training or education in the use of explosives within three consecutive years and a background investigation for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia. Renewal of the pyrotechnician certificate will be issued upon proof of at least 12 accumulated hours of continued training or education in the subject areas of explosives storage, the design, setup, or conduct of a fireworks display within three consecutive years and a background investigation for compliance with Section 27-97.2 of the Code of Virginia. The continued training or education required for renewal of a blaster or pyrotechnician certificate shall be obtained during the three years immediately prior to the certificate’s published expiration date. Failure to renew a blaster or pytotechnician certificate in accordance with this section shall cause an individual to obtain another blaster or pyrotechnician certificate upon compliance with Section 3301.4.1 to continue engaging in the unsupervised use of explosives or conducting a fireworks display. 

 Change Section 3301.7 to read:  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 32 -  3301.7 Seizure. The fire official is authorized to remove or cause to be removed or disposed of in an approved manner, at the expense of the owner, fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, possessed or used in violation of this chapter.  Add the following definitions to Section 3302.1 to read:  BACKGROUND CLEARANCE CARD (BCC). An identification card issued to an individual who is not a certified blaster or pyrotechnician and is responsible management or an employee of a company, corporation, firm or other entity, solely for the purpose of submitting an application to the fire official for a permit to manufacture, use, handle, store, or sell explosive materials, or conduct a fireworks display. A person to whom a BCC has been issued can fulfill the role of a designated individual on an application for permit to manufacture, use, handle, store, or sell explosive materials, or on an application for permit to design, setup and conduct a fireworks display. 

 BLASTER, RESTRICTED. Any person engaging in the use of explosives or blasting agents utilizing five pounds (2.25 kg) or less per blasting operation and using instantaneous detonators. A certified restricted blaster can fulfill the role of a designated individual on an application for permit to manufacture, use, handle, store, or sell explosive materials.  BLASTER, UNRESTRICTED. Any person engaging in the use of explosives or blasting agents without limit to the amount of explosives or blasting agents or type of detonator. A certified unrestricted blaster can fulfill the role of a designated individual on an application for permit to manufacture, use, handle, store, or sell explosive materials.  DESIGN. For the purposes of a fireworks display, either inside a building or structure or outdoors, it shall mean the pyrotechnician who will be in attendance and makes the final artistic determination for the placement of fireworks and ground display pieces suitable for the display site.  DESIGNATED INDIVIDUAL. A person in possession of a BCC issued by the SFMO, or is certified by the SFMO as a pyrotechnician, or is a restricted or unrestricted blaster, any of whom are responsible for (i) ensuring compliance with state law and regulations relating to blasting agents and explosives, (ii) applying for explosives or firework permits, (iii) is at least 21 years of age, and (iv) shall demonstrate the capability to effectively communicate safety messages verbally and in writing in the English language.  PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS. Any sparklers, fountains, Pharaoh's serpents, caps for pistols, or pinwheels commonly known as whirligigs or spinning jennies.  PYROTECHNICIAN (FIREWORK OPERATOR). Any person supervising or engaged in the design, setup or conducting of any fireworks display, either inside a building or outdoors. A certified pyrotechnician can fulfill the role of a designated individual on an application for permit for a fireworks display. 

 Pyrotechnician, aerial. A person supervising or engaged in the design, setup or conducting of a outdoor aerial fireworks display performed in accordance with the regulations as set forth in this code and NFPA 1123, a referenced standard for fireworks displays.  Pyrotechnician, proximate. A person supervising or engaged in the design, setup or conducting of a fireworks display, either inside a building or outdoors, performed in accordance with the regulations as set forth in this code and NFPA 1126, a referenced standard for the use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience.  RESPONSIBLE MANAGEMENT. A person who is any of the following:  1. The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship.  2. The partners of a general partnership.  3. The managing partners of a limited partnership.  4. The officers of a corporation.  5. The managers of a limited liability company. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 33 -   6. The officers or directors of an association, or both. 

 7. Individuals in other business entities recognized under the laws of the Commonwealth as having a fiduciary responsibility to the firm.  SOLE PROPRIETOR. A person or individual, not a corporation, who is trading under his own name, or under an assumed or fictitious name pursuant to the provisions of Section 59.1-69 through 59.1-76 of the Code of Virginia.  Change the following definitions in Section 3302.1 to read:  FIREWORKS. Any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, or other substance or object, of whatever form or construction, that contains any explosive or inflammable compound or substance, and is intended, or commonly known, as fireworks and that explodes, rises into the air or travels laterally, or fires projectiles into the air. Fireworks shall not include automobile flares, paper caps containing not more than an average of 0.25 grain (16 mg) of explosive content per cap or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices utilizing such caps and items commonly known as party poppers, pop rocks and snap-n-pops. Fireworks may be further delineated and referred to as:  Fireworks, 1.4G. (Formerly known as Class C, Common Fireworks.) Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the DOTn for Fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: Parts 1500 and 1507, are not explosive materials for the purpose of this code.  Fireworks, 1.3G. (Formerly Class B, Special Fireworks.) Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not limited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2 grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces that exceed the limits for classification as 1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks are also described as Fireworks, UN0335 by the DOTn.  SMOKELESS PROPELLANTS. Solid propellants, commonly referred to as smokeless powders or any propellant classified by DOTn as a smokeless propellant in accordance with “NA3178, Smokeless Powder for Small Arms,” used in small arms ammunition, firearms, cannons, rockets, propellant-actuated devices, and similar articles.  Change Section 3305.1 to read:  3305.1 General. The manufacture, assembly and testing of explosives, ammunition, blasting agents and fireworks shall comply with the requirements of this section, Title 59.1, Chapter 11 of the Code of Virginia, and NFPA 495 or NFPA 1124.  Exceptions:  1. The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not offered for resale.  2. The mixing and loading of blasting agents at blasting sites in accordance with NFPA 495.  3. The use of binary explosives or plosophoric materials in blasting or pyrotechnic special effects applications in accordance with NFPA 495 or NFPA 1126.  Add Section 3305.1.1 to read:  3305.1.1 Permits. Permits for the manufacture, assembly and testing of explosives, ammunition, blasting agents and fireworks shall be required as set forth in Section 107.2 and regulated in accordance with this section. A permit to manufacture any explosive material in any quantity shall be prohibited unless such manufacture is authorized by a federal license and conducted in accordance with recognized safety practices.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 34 -  Change Section 3306.4 to read:  3306.4 Storage in residences. Propellants for personal use in quantities not exceeding 50 pounds (23 kg) of black powder or 100 pounds (45 kg) of smokeless powder shall be stored in original containers in occupancies limited to Group R-3 and R-5, or 200 pounds (91 kg) of smokeless powder when stored in the manufacturer's original containers in detached Group U structures that are at least 10 feet from inhabited buildings and are accessory to Group R-3 or R-5. In other than Group R-3 or R-5, smokeless powder in quantities exceeding 20 pounds (9 kg) but not exceeding 50 pounds (23 kg) shall be kept in a wooden box or cabinet having walls of at least one inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or equivalent.  Delete Sections 3306.4.1 and 3306.4.2.  Change Section 3306.5.1.1 to read:  3306.5.1.1 Smokeless propellant. No more than 100 pounds (45 kg) of smokeless propellants, in containers of 8 pounds (3.6 kg) or less capacity, shall be displayed in Group M occupancies.  Delete Section 3306.5.1.3.  Change Section 3306.5.2.1 to read:  3306.5.2.1 Smokeless propellant. Commercial stocks of smokeless propellants shall be stored as follows:  1. Quantities exceeding 20 pounds (9 kg), but not exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg) shall be stored in portable wooden boxes having walls of at least one inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or equivalent.  2. Quantities exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg), but not exceeding 800 pounds (363 kg), shall be stored in storage cabinets having walls at least one inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or equivalent. Not more than 400 pounds (182 kg) shall be stored in any one cabinet, and cabinets shall be separated by a distance of at least 25 feet (7620 mm) or by a fire partition having a fire-resistance rating of at least one hour.  3. Storage of quantities exceeding 800 pounds (363 kg), but not exceeding 5,000 pounds (2270 kg) in a building shall comply with all of the following:  3.1. The storage is inaccessible to unauthorized personnel.  3.2. Smokeless propellant shall be stored in nonportable storage cabinets having wood walls at least one inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or equivalent and having shelves with no more than three feet (914 mm) of vertical separation between shelves.  3.3. No more than 400 pounds (182 kg) is stored in any one cabinet.  3.4. Cabinets shall be located against walls with at least 40 feet (12 192 mm) between cabinets. The minimum required separation between cabinets may be reduced to 20 feet (6096 mm) provided that barricades twice the height of the cabinets are attached to the wall, midway between each cabinet. The barricades must extend a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) outward, be firmly attached to the wall, and be constructed of steel not less than 0.25 inch thick (6.4 mm), two-inch (51 mm) nominal thickness wood, brick, or concrete block.  3.5. Smokeless propellant shall be separated from materials classified as combustible liquids, flammable liquids, flammable solids, or oxidizing materials by a distance of 25 feet (7620 mm) or by a fire partition having a fire-resistance rating of one hour.  3.6. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 35 -  4. Smokeless propellants not stored according to Item 1, 2, or 3 above shall be stored in a Type 2 or 4 magazine in accordance with Section 3304 and NFPA 495.  Change Section 3307.1 to read:  3307.1 General. Blasting operations shall be conducted only by persons certified by the SFMO as a restricted or unrestricted blaster or shall be supervised on-site by a person properly certified by the SFMO as a restricted or unrestricted blaster.  Add Section 3307.16 to read:  3307.16 Blast records. A record of each blast shall be kept and retained for at least five years and shall be available for inspection by the code official. The record shall contain the following minimum data:  1. Name of contractor;  2. Location and time of blast;  3. Name of certified blaster in charge;  4. Type of material blasted;  5. Number of holes bored and spacing;  6. Diameter and depth of holes;  7. Type and amount of explosives;  8. Amount of explosive per delay of 8 milliseconds or greater;  9. Method of firing and type of circuit;  10. Direction and distance in feet to nearest dwelling, public building, school, church, commercial or institutional building;  11. Weather conditions;  12. Whether or not mats or other precautions were used;  13. Type of detonator and delay period;  14. Type and height of stemming; and  15. Seismograph record when utilized.  Exception: Subdivisions 8 and 13 of this section are not applicable to restricted blasters.  Change Section 3308.2 to read: 

 3308.2 Permit application. Prior to issuing permits for a fireworks display, plans for the fireworks display, inspections of the display site and demonstrations of the display operations shall be approved. A plan establishing procedures to follow and actions to be taken in the event that a shell fails to ignite in, or discharge from, a mortar or fails to function over the fallout area or other malfunctions shall be provided to the fire code official.   In addition to the requirements of Section 3301.2.3.1, a permit to conduct a fireworks display shall not be issued to any applicant without the applicant identifying on the application the pyrotechnician who will be in responsible charge of the fireworks display and who is appropriately certified as a pyrotechnician in accordance with Section 3301.4.1. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 36 -   Exception: Permits are not required for the use or display of permissible fireworks on private property with the consent of the owner of such property. 

 Change Section 3308.3 to read:  3308.3 Approved fireworks displays. Approved fireworks displays shall include only the approved fireworks 1.3G, fireworks 1.4G, fireworks 1.4S and pyrotechnic articles 1.4G. The design, setup, conducting or direct on-site supervision of the design, setup and conducting of any fireworks display, either inside a building or outdoors, shall be performed only by persons certified by the SFMO in accordance with Section 3301.4.1 as a pyrotechnician (firework operator) and at least one person properly certified by the SFMO as a pyrotechnician shall be present at the site where the fireworks display is being conducted. The approved fireworks shall be arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner that will not pose a hazard to property or endanger any person.  Exception: Certification as a pyrotechnician is not required for the use or display of permissible fireworks when conducted on private property with the consent of the owner of such property.  Change Section 3308.4 to read:  3308.4 Clearance. Spectators, spectator parking areas, and dwellings, buildings or structures shall not be located within the display site. The site for the outdoor land or water display shall have at least 100-ft/in. (31-m/2.4mm) radius of internal mortar distance of the largest shell to be fired as shown in Table 3308.4.  Exceptions:  1. This provision shall not apply to pyrotechnic special effects and fireworks displays using Division 1.4G materials before a proximate audience in accordance with NFPA 1126.  2. This provision shall not apply to unoccupied dwellings, buildings and structures with the approval of the building owner and the fire code official.  Add Table 3308.4 to read:  TABLE 3308.4 DISTANCES FOR OUTDOOR FIREWORKS DISPLAY SITES: MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES TO SPECTATORS FOR LAND AND WATER DISPLAYS  MORTAR SIZEa MINIMUM SECURED DIAMETER OF SITE VERTICAL MORTARSb ANGLED MORTARSc 1/3 OFFSET MORTARS TO SPECIAL HAZARDS 

in mm ft m ft m ft m ft m 

<3 <76 300 92 150 46 100 31 300 92 

3 76 600 183 300 92 200 61 600 183 

4 102 800 244 400 122 266 81 800 244 

5 127 1000 305 500 152 334 102 1000 305 

6 152 1200 366 600 183 400 122 1200 366 

7 178 1400 427 700 213 467 142 1400 427 

8 203 1600 488 800 244 534 163 1600 488 

10 254 2000 610 1000 305 667 203 2000 610 

12 305 2400 732 1200 366 800 244 2400 732 

>12 Requires the approval of the fire official 

a. Aerial shells, mines, and comets shall be classified and described only in terms of the inside diameter of the mortar from which they are fired (e.g., 3-in. (76-mm) aerial shells, mines and comets are only for use in 3-in. (76mm) mortars). b. Where the mortars are positioned vertically, the mortars shall be placed at the approximate center of the display site. c. Mortars shall be permitted to be angled during a display to allow for wind and to carry shells away from the main spectator viewing areas. For angled mortars, the minimum secured diameter of the display site does not change. Only the location of the mortars within the secured area changes when the mortars are angled. d. Note that this is only the distance to the special hazards. The minimum secured diameter of the display site does not change. 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 37 -   CHAPTER 38 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES Change Section 3801.2 to read:  3801.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 107.2. Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the fire code official, except when the container is for temporary use on construction sites.  Add Section 3806.4 to read:  3806.4 DOT cylinders filled on site. DOT cylinders in stationary service that are filled on site and therefore are not under the jurisdiction of DOT either shall be requalified in accordance with DOT requirements or shall be visually inspected within 12 years of the date of manufacture or within five years from May 1, 2008, whichever is later, and within every five years thereafter, in accordance with the following:  1. Any cylinder that fails one or more of the criteria in Item 3 shall not be refilled or continued in service until the condition is corrected.  2. Personnel shall be trained and qualified to perform inspections.  3. Visual inspection shall be performed in accordance with the following:  3.1. The cylinder is checked for exposure to fire, dents, cuts, digs, gouges, and corrosion according to CGA C-6, Standards for Visual Inspection of Steel Compressed Gas Cylinders, except that paragraph 4.2.1(1) of that standard (which requires tare weight certification), shall not be part of the required inspection criteria.  3.2. The cylinder protective collar (where utilized) and the foot ring are intact and are firmly attached.  3.3. The cylinder is painted or coated to retard corrosion.  3.4. The cylinder pressure relief valve indicates no visible damage, corrosion of operating components, or obstructions.  3.5. There is no leakage from the cylinder or its appurtenances that is detectable without the use of instruments.  3.6. The cylinder is installed on a firm foundation and is not in contact with the soil.  3.7. A cylinder that passed the visual inspection shall be marked with the month and year of the examination followed by the letter "E" (example: 10-01E, indicating requalification in October 2001 by the external inspection method).  3.8. The results of the visual inspection shall be documented, and a record of the inspection shall be retained for a five-year period.  Exception: Any inspection procedure outlined in Items 3.1 through 3.8 that would require a cylinder be moved in such a manner that disconnection from the piping system would be necessary shall be omitted, provided the other inspection results do not indicate further inspection is warranted.  Add Sections 3809.15 and 3809.15.1 to read: 

 




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011   - 38 -  3809.15 LP-Gas cylinder exchange for resale. In addition to other applicable requirements of this chapter, facilities operating cylinder exchange stations for LP-gas that are accessible to the public shall comply with the following requirements. 

 1. Cylinders shall be secured in a lockable, ventilated metal cabinet or other approved enclosure.  2. Cylinders shall be accessible only by authorized personnel or by use of an automated exchange system in accordance with Section 3809.15.1.  3. A sign shall be posted on the entry door of the business operating the cylinder exchange stating “DO NOT BRING LP-GAS CYLINDERS INTO THE BUILDING” or similar approved wording.  4. An emergency contact information sign shall be posted within 10 feet of the cylinder storage cabinet. The content, lettering, size, color and location of the required sign shall be as required by the fire code official.  3809.15.1 Automated Cylinder Exchange Stations. Cylinder exchange stations that include an automated vending system for exchanging cylinders shall comply with the following additional requirements:  1. The vending system shall only permit access to a single cylinder per individual transaction.  2. Cabinets storing cylinders shall be designed such that cylinders can only be placed inside when they are oriented in the upright position.  3. Devices operating door releases for access to stored cylinders shall be permitted to be pneumatic, mechanical or electrically powered.  4. Electrical equipment inside of or within 5 feet of a cabinet storing cylinders, including but not limited to electronics associated with vending operations, shall comply with the requirements for Class 1, Division 2 equipment in accordance with NFPA 70.  5. A manual override control shall be permitted for use by authorized personnel. On newly installed cylinder exchange stations, the vending system shall not be capable of returning to automatic operation after a manual override until the system has been inspected and reset by authorized personnel.  6. Inspections shall be conducted by authorized personnel to verify that all cylinders are secured, access doors are closed and the station has no visible damage or obvious defects, which necessitate placing the station out of service. The frequency of inspections shall be as specified by the fire code official.  Change Section 3811.2 to read:  3811.2 Unattended parking. The unattended parking of LP-gas tank vehicles shall be in accordance with Sections 3811.2.1 and 3811.2.2.  Exception: The unattended outdoor parking of LP-gas tank vehicles may also be in accordance with Section 9.7.2 of NFPA 58. 

CHAPTER 46 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS Delete Chapter 46 in its entirety.  CHAPTER 47 REFERENCED STANDARDS Change the referenced standards as follows (standards not shown remain the same):  




2009 VIRGINIA STATEWIDE FIRE PREVENTION CODE – Effective March 1, 2011 

  - 39 -   CGA Compressed Gas Association 1725 Jefferson Davis Highway 5th Floor Arlington, VA 22202-4102    

Standard reference number   Title Referenced in code section number  

C-6—(2001)    Standards for Visual Inspection of Steel Compressed Gas Cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3806.4  

 UL Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 333 Pfingsten Road Northbrook, IL 60062   

 

Standard reference number   Title Referenced in code section number  

1037-99     Standard for Antitheft Alarms and Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .506.1  1278-00     Standard for Movable and Wall- or Ceiling-Hung Electric Room Heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 605.10.1  




